[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So we now have in the EFT
tapping world over a decade,
even longer, of clinical
trials that have actually been
published.
Now in the research terms,
a randomized clinical trial
is the pinnacle of research.
So it's sort of beyond
a case study or somebody
giving their experience.
It really is a
scientific process
where people are randomly
allocated to a condition.
They don't get any choice,
it removes all that bias.
And often people involved in
the running of those research
trials are often
blind to knowing what
the outcomes are going to be.
So again, we minimize bias.
Now we have in the
EFT world, over 50
of those randomized
clinical trials that
exist across a range of
different conditions.
In addition to that, there's
another 50 to 60 single case
studies, pre and post
studies and things like that.
And of course, above that,
we even have something
called a meta analysis,
which we'll get into today.
But the science and the
research behind tapping,
what it's actually
showing is we've
come well beyond
understanding how EFT works.
And certainly, learning
more about the impact
it has not only at
an emotional level,
so people will tell
you they feel better
at the end of tapping,
but they actually,
we now know through physiology
studies, have a different body.
So actually have
a different brain.
So the research
initially started
very much in the post-traumatic
stress disorder area,
because it is such an
area in the returning war
vets communities that there was
a lot of research done there
in the beginning.
And that has continued.
But really what has
come out of that
is the first DNA study of EFT,
where there were war vets who
had returned from war that
was still meeting criteria
for post-traumatic stress
disorder, which we know
is one of the most debilitating
mental diseases, disorders
that people can suffer from.
And certainly meeting
criteria means
you have a whole
range of symptoms.
So that could be everything
from depression and anxiety
to hyper vigilance to
insomnia to certainly things
like drug and alcohol use
and abusiveness and anger.
So a range of things that
really impacts people's lives.
Now the very first study in
physiology of DNA with EFT
actually was done in a war vet.
So it actually showed
that after 10 weeks, so
one hour in a week,
10 weeks of EFT,
tapping on all those things,
the DNA in those war vets,
and their partners were
involved, was changed.
So there were six
genes responsible
for the stress response
that were actually
presenting themselves
as what we call,
post-traumatic stress disorder.
Now those six genes, what
we called down regulated.
So when a gene stops
expressing itself,
we no longer have a symptom.
That can obviously have
roll on effects and things
like improved immunity and
suppression of cancer cells
and things like that.
So six months later, those
genes in those war vets
still had not started
to express themselves.
So we know that DNA
changes can actually
occur and stay changed.
Another study looked
at a single hour
of tapping for stress
and things like that.
And just in one hour, 72 genes
changed their expression.
Now they were related to
things like immunity and cancer
suppression and things like
cortisol, the stress hormone.
Now 72 genes changing
after one hour of tapping
tells us it's not just
a feel good technique
that makes you feel
calmer at the end, which
is a bonus anyway.
We physically have something
different, very different
that's going on here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we've a range of different
studies that have actually
looked at not only things like
post-traumatic stress disorder,
but phobias, so some of
those psychological issues
that people do suffer
from and again, can be
really debilitating, phobias.
We've had chronic pain
studies that have come out,
and we've done some of
those here in Australia,
where a four-hour intensive
tapping session for people
with chronic pain showed an
absolute significant decrease,
which statistically means
it's not due to chance.
Significant decrease
in the level of pain.
So the severity
and the intensity
of pain, that six
months later had not
represented itself to
any of those patients.
So to have EFT included
in chronic pain programs
worldwide, we believe
is an absolute must,
because of the
impact that it can
have not only on
things like pain,
but depression and
anxiety and different mood
conditions that go with it.
So here in Australia, we
have done about 15 years
worth of research
now, particularly
in the area for obesity
and overweight adults
of looking at weight loss.
So we were really curious to see
whether or not the daily foods
that people do eat that
perhaps aren't great
for them, if we could
eliminate those with tapping,
reduce the desire, would
that have a long term
effect on their weight loss.
And of course, it does.
So whilst we might run
an eight-week treatment
program for two hours a week
where we tap on food cravings,
and there is a video
that you can actually
watch to actually work
through a food craving,
we found that the impact
of not having desire
for any single food, of
course would last over time.
And we do have a
two-year follow-up
showing that people don't
actually have their food
cravings return.
What that looks like in your
life is within time, of course
not eating those foods, you
actually then lose weight.
You of course, can use tapping
for things like increasing
your motivation to exercise,
drinking more water,
those sorts of things as well.
But what we have found
time and time again,
and sometimes it is
a surprise to people,
is that whilst people will
come to clinical trials
or go and see a
practitioner to learn
to use tapping for things like
weight loss or food cravings,
is they sometimes don't realize
it may not be about the food.
The food really for us, is
the pinnacle of the iceberg.
That it really is just the
way that someone copes.
Now that food could
be substituted
for a different type
of addictive behavior.
That could be a legal or
illegal drug or medication.
It could be something
like exercise.
It could be work
for some people.
But any type of addiction
that becomes obsessive
or a self-soothing activity
as the only go-to thing
that you have, of course,
can become problematic.
But what it really does
tell us, is that it really
is just a symptom.
And sometimes tapping
can work remarkably fast.
So anyone that does often
find tapping videos online
and taps along with them
might quite quickly feel
like tapping's not
working, because they
feel more distressed.
What's actually happening,
is tapping is working.
But of course, not
knowing that, sitting
on the other side
of the screen when
you might be tapping about
bringing more wealth and more
money into your life,
but you suddenly
think of something
from your childhood,
can be quite distressing
for somebody, and of course,
shut the video down and walk
away with a really highly
distressed state.
Just remember, it does actually
mean tapping's working,
because it's actually peeled
that layer off quite quickly.
So it does happen in the food
space and the weight area
as well.
That people will often
tap on a food craving
and start to lose the
desire, but then suddenly,
out of nowhere, have
a thought or a memory.
And that could be
from five years ago
or it could be
from 35 years ago.
And often not knowing,
will dismiss that thought.
But what's actually
happening in tapping,
is as the amygdala, that stress
center of the brain which
sends out the craving,
starts to become quiet,
it allows the hippocampus,
which is the next door neighbor
organ in the brain, which
is your memory center.
So as your amygdala quiets
down, the hippocampus
is allowed to open up.
And so that is the reason
people get random thoughts
and memories when
they start tapping
and they start to calm down.
Now not knowing that, you'll
dismiss that thought and go,
I was tapping on my chocolate.
What's that got to do with it?
And why am I thinking
of that teacher that's
humiliating me in front of
the class when I was five,
and dismiss it.
But what it actually is,
is your hippocampus saying,
that's what's linked to
your current food craving.
Now in tapping, we
do have processes
beyond our basic
tapping on ourselves,
where we can actually process
different memories that
are quite significant for people
through a certain process.
And they are best done in
the hands of somebody that's
skilled and a practitioner.
Certainly we can arrange
that access for anybody.
So there are ways
that we can go back
and process what is still stuck.
So what we have found
in 15 years of research
in the food and weight
area, is there are sometimes
traumas in the background.
Now a trauma is a
personal definition
of when you felt
abandoned or isolated
or without a skill set,
that you couldn't cope.
So we do look at something
that's dramatic and unexpected
and I don't have
any skills to cope.
Now you could have been 15 when
something like that happened,
but you could have been five.
People have those
moments when they're 30.
It's whatever that
definition is for you.
But often, what it is that's
the symptom in the day-to-day,
and that could be the soothing
of the food or the drinking
of the alcohol or the taking
of the prescription medication.
That is the soother
to try and make
that feeling go away
that doesn't make sense
to the brain.
Traumas in the brain when
we're too young to cope
are book-ended.
We talk about that they're
put into a capsule.
So I say there's a
bookend when it started
and a bookend when it ended.
And it's like it becomes put
in this little memory pod
that people bury in the
ground for future generations.
But it's in your mind.
And that capsule
stays protected.
Because the brain
doesn't have a way
to process that at
whatever age you were.
So that's what it does to cope.
It's very clever when
you think about it.
What happens as we're adults
though, is lots of things
happen to us in life,
and sometimes something
can trigger that
capsule to open up.
And sometimes that
thing is tapping.
So if you're tapping
for the first time alone
and you're learning it at
home or through a video
and inadvertently
and unconsciously
that capsule starts
to open up, that
is when people will start to
remember memories, and not
realize sometimes
that it's connected
to the current symptom.
So there's lots of
things that are there.
Tapping to me, though, as a
fourth wave therapy approach,
really is one of the fastest and
one of the safest when you work
with somebody who actually
knows what they're doing
and can support you through
that process, one of the fastest
ways to actually process
this, and process it for good.
So the research
is fast spreading,
and it really has gone in
so many different areas.
So we've done a lot
here in Australia,
but in America and the UK, it's
just been growing and growing.
We know that not only the DNA,
but cortisol has been measured,
and we've done
that here as well.
The original one hour of
tapping study on cortisol
measured it through saliva.
So it's the easiest way
to measure cortisol.
And that original study had
a 24% reduction in cortisol
in one hour of tapping,
which was fantastic.
They compared that to reading
a magazine and relaxing,
and they only got
a 12% reduction.
And they also compared it to
a psychoeducation group that
learnt about the stress
and things like that.
They only got a 12% reduction.
So in the one hour, tapping
got double the reduction
in cortisol.
Now at Bond University, we
repeated that trial in 2019.
We replicated it
exactly to see if we
would get the same
outcomes, which
is important in
the research world
to see that it's
due to the technique
and not the people involved or
delivering the interventions.
So we did exactly
the same thing.
And our particular trial,
our reading group got worse.
They had an increase in
their cortisol of 2%.
So their cortisol levels
actually increased.
Perhaps sitting around
reading a magazine when
you know you've got to go
and do other things actually
isn't a relaxing
activity for everybody.
So they actually
got an increase.
Our group that did the
psychoeducation and learnt
about stress and
what it did to them,
and maybe how to
think differently,
had a 19 and 1/2% reduction,
so it's similar to the 14% that
the original trial had
received, just one hour.
But our EFT tapping group had
a 43% reduction in cortisol
in one hour.
So we doubled the effect.
So five years down the track
with more understanding
and more knowledge of what
we teach, one hour of tapping
was able to result in a
43% reduction of cortisol.
And cortisol, of
course, is linked
to so many things, such
as inflammation and body
weight and pain and lots
of different conditions.
So to be able to actually
physiologically do something
about that is profound.
Now the end of the research,
evidence science sort of area,
is something that's
called meta analysis.
Now, what that
actually means, is
when there's enough studies in
one single area, say depression
or anxiety or post-traumatic
stress disorder,
we're able to analyze all
of the data in one group.
What that allows
us to do, is truly
see, is the outcomes
due to chance or are
they Indeed, being
influenced by other things,
such as the facilitator,
who's warm and encouraging
and listening to you?
Or the environment
that you're in
is lovely, that type of thing.
Or the group support
that's around you.
So a meta analysis, when
you've got enough studies,
allows that.
Now the meta analysis that
exists so far for EFT,
have actually been done
by independent people
in the field, which
is even better.
So they're not people that
perhaps are EFT researchers,
but they're outside the field.
So again, bias is limited.
So the normal way that we look
at effect size and what effect
that it has, is by giving
it a number at a 0.1.
So we go from 0 to a 0.1.
And normally, it's
a decimal point.
So a 0.2 effect size means
look, something is happening,
but really there's
probably things
there to explain it other
than the intervention.
So the effect size of 0.2,
close to 0.0, is quite small.
A medium effect size, 0.5,
sitting in the middle there,
look, something's happening,
and probably some of the outcome
is due to the intervention,
but some of it's probably not.
Now medication trials
typically have an effect size
of about 0.05, 0.06,
meaning, yes, the outcomes
you're getting are
due to that, but they
may be due to other things
too, like the authority you've
given to the doctor, who's
prescribed that, or placebo
effect even.
Anything up around 0.8,
0.9 is a large effect size,
and it really is saying the
outcomes you're seeing here
are actually due to the
intervention, whatever
that might be.
And really, there's not
much at all, 0.1, that
would be responsible for that.
Now let me swing back
to EFT and the meta
analysis that have been done.
So the meta analysis for
depression and anxiety
have actually been
completed separately.
And these are over 15
odd trials that get
investigated in one big hit.
So the effect size
for anxiety is 1.23.
Now what that means, is
a very large effect size.
So normally when you
look to that number 0.1,
but to have an effect
size over the 0.1
actually means
there is no way you
could argue anything other
than the tapping intervention
has resulted in that lack of
diagnosis or lack of symptoms.
Depression has had over 15
studies looked at it as well.
And the effect size for
depression was about 1.27,
so it was even slightly higher.
We've run several depression
trials here of major depression
in Australia as well,
and had the same types
of outcomes, where people
don't meet diagnosis
after their intervention.
Now the PTSD meta analysis
that has been done, the effect
size of all of those
studies, looking at again,
an absence of
diagnosis and symptoms,
and of course, improved
quality of life.
The effect size was 2.96.
Let's say that again.
2.96.
Meaning normally we look at a
0.1, and that's really large,
and we have an
effect size here that
shows there is absolutely
nothing else that
could be responsible
for the outcomes we're
seeing here, except for
the intervention itself.
And of course, it's
such a large area
that's been investigated,
that we know that time
and time again, not only
at DNA and cortisol levels,
but of course, lack of
diagnosis down the track.
We've had another meta
analysis that's actually
looked at what we call,
dismantling or comparison
studies, where we have actually,
and the question sometimes
comes to mind, is it actually
the tapping on the pressure
points that has anything here?
Is it the words that we say?
Is that the deep breath that we
take at the end of every round?
Is that what's responsible?
So lots of studies have
actually pulled apart,
if you like, those
different aspects.
And there's been about
six studies now, again,
run independently by
people outside the field.
Where perhaps one group
just learns the words,
but don't do any tapping.
Another group that just taps on
acupressure points, but perhaps
doesn't say the words.
Another group that perhaps does
diaphragmatic breathing as they
walk through the statements,
but doesn't do any tapping.
And then, of course,
what we call,
sham tapping, where
Harvard University has
done the research to show
that all of the acupuncture
points that are used in
traditional acupuncture
have been mapped in the body.
So we actually know
where they are.
And of course, they're
not everywhere.
So for example, the
under part of your arm
he doesn't have any
pressure points.
So the best dismantling
study that's been done
has been done with an open palm
there as a sham point, where
there are no active
pressure points there,
and there are none
on the palm either.
Now several of the
dismantling studies
did make the mistake of
using the finger points,
because of course, we
have pressure points
on each side of a fingernail.
So by tapping on a
traditional pressure point,
we've also activating
these ones on the fingers.
So to use these
ones on a sham point
inadvertently
activate these ones.
So sometimes these things
need to be cleaned up
as we go along.
So all of these
studies have actually
been looked at in one big group.
And of course,
what they've found
is the active ingredient
in EFT is the tapping
on a true accupoint.
So sometimes when we're
in the state of a feeling
and we can't quite think
of the word to say,
just the act of tapping
while staying tuned in
will still have the
outcome that you are after.
You don't physically
have to say the word
if you're tuned in
with the distress
feeling in the body or
certainly a somatic sensation.
So it is actually the,
and it is important to tap
on the right pressure
points as we go along,
so that you are
actually hitting it,
because that meta
analysis has Indeed
shown that it is an
active ingredient
in the tapping process.
So I do believe we're
at a tipping point.
I have talked in the past
about tapping perhaps
being part of a fourth wave.
So the fourth wave that's
coming through in psychotherapy
is very much coming back
to body-based approaches.
So somatic processing, EMDR,
the eye movement desensitization
reprocessing therapies,
those are all
represented in this fourth wave.
And EFT is firmly
in there as well,
where we're actually
shifting out of,
and the first three
waves included
the basic psychodynamic,
so Sigmund Freud,
coming into the
behavioralists, where we looked
at classical conditioning.
And then the third wave was our
cognitive behavioral therapies,
which did include
mindfulness and hybrids,
such as acceptance and
commitment therapy.
But really where
we've come is now,
I believe, into a fourth
wave, with the research
behind these
body-based therapies,
EFT included, is demonstrating
not only the speed
at which they can work, but the
long-term neurological changes
that occur and seem
to stay permanent.
And that's, of course, what
most people are looking
for when they walk
through that door
and want to have therapy
or a consultation,
is they want to know how
to remove this problem
and feel better
and feel happier.
So Harvard University
was one of the first.
And they did a
10-year study where
they looked at through MRI
imaging, where acupuncture
points were in the body.
So they were the first
to really document
that we have all these
acupressure points all
over the body.
Now in Chinese medicine and
those schools of thought,
we of course, talk about
things like meridians
and the energy system that
runs through the body.
And originally, back
in the early days
of even EFT research,
there was an understanding
that perhaps what we were
doing was energetically
affecting the body's
meridian system, which
certainly has been around
for hundreds of years.
What we now know though, with
the Harvard University study,
but also Korean researchers,
is they've actually
shown that this meridian
energetic system
or what was once
thought of as that,
is actually now a
physical system.
That there are imagery slides
showing that the meridian
system is smaller than
a capillary, which
is our smallest vessel
known at this stage.
So these capillaries and
then an even smaller version
is actually a physical system.
So coupled with the
information that came out
of Harvard University,
we now believe
that the tapping on these
pressure points of course,
is not only impacting how
somebody feels emotionally,
but also the body's
physiology system.
So certainly if we have studies
that show cortisol is reduced,
DNA changes occur after an hour,
if not 10 sessions of tapping,
we have things like heart rate
variability, blood pressure,
all those types of
studies have actually all
been included with EFT,
we see all those changes.
It starts to make a little bit
more sense that we are actually
having an impact here then on
the body's physical system.
We know through other
studies, MRI studies,
that when we actually stimulate
pressure points, whether it's
through true
acupuncture or tapping,
the stress center in the brain,
the amygdala, which normally
lights up to send out that fight
or flight response when you're
feeling distressed or that
emotional response, actually
becomes quieter.
We know through other studies,
that doesn't necessarily
happen.
But with lots of the body-based
ones and mindfulness meditation
included, the amygdala
does quieten down.
And in many cases,
long-term versions
of tapping or
meditation show that
that material, that can
actually become smaller.
Now the opposite
can happen as well.
That if we stay in a high stress
state for a very long period
of time, the
amygdala can actually
grow bigger, which
means it doesn't take
as much to set it off anymore.
So the EFT research
is showing not only
does tapping on the pressure
points send that signal back,
but that this is
lasting over time,
and what you may once
have got upset about,
no longer affects you
when it happens again.
Which answers the question,
do I have to keep tapping.
So if I tap on my
phobia of a cockroach
and I see a cockroach
in the future,
will I have the same response
and have to tap again?
And the answer tends to be no.
Because the brain has
actually changed its pathway.
Now we know through
the body-based areas
in somatic psychology
and things like that,
that touch has always had a
comforting, soothing thing.
We touch children,
we hug children.
We might intuitively as a
mom when we hold an infant,
rub up and down on their back.
And might be patting as well.
We know through lots
of trauma research
that all of those
types of activities
regulate the brain
as it's actually
growing and developing.
But of course, there's
acupressure points
all down the spine.
Not only of babies and
humans, but of dogs
and cats and horses.
So then we have a lot of equine
therapists that use EFT now,
and vets who are actually
using EFT in waiting rooms
and teaching there, which
is wonderful to see.
But what it shows again, is it's
not just the words that we say,
but of course, we're
mindful when we do EFT,
but it's also the
somatic element.
It's the touch of
those pressure points
that really is having
such an impact.
And that meta
analysis has actually
shown it's an active ingredient.
That physicalness, which is
why when it's self-applied,
we're literally doing
our own self soothing.
And I think there's
no greater gift
than to have the
ability, when you're
in any emotional
distress, to know
that you have something that
can actually calm that down.
[MUSIC PLAYING]